from Hanselman it's dot
com. It's Hanselman. It's a
weekly discussion with web developer
and technologist Scott Hanselman hosted
by Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan
announcing show number one 51
recorded live Tuesday, February 17th, 2009. Supports
for Hanselman it's just provided
by Tellerik rad controls. The
most comprehensive suite of components
for windows forms and asp.net
web applications. online@wwwdottelerikdotcomandby.net developers journal
the world's leading.net developer magazine
online at www dot
dot com. In this episode,
Scott talks with ward Cunningham
and James shore about fit
and fitness. Hi, this is
Scott Hanselman and this is
another episode of Hansel minutes.
I'm here at the open
agile Northwest conference, and I'm
sitting down today with James
shore, agile practitioner and author
of the art of agile
development. Hi Scott. Hi, how's
it going, sir? And I'm
also here with ward Cunningham,
inventor of the Wiki and
CTO of about us.org and
one of the first practitioners
of a patterns of bringing
patterns to the world. Thank
you, sir. Ah, it's great
to be here. So I
think that we should talk
about fit and fitness. And
I think that although you
sir, are looking very fit
and lately, and I understand
you're doing a lot of
bike riding the fit and
fitness that we're talking about
today is a little different.
So maybe one of you
could familiarize us with those
terms for those of the
listeners that aren't familiar. Sure
fit is well, it's a
tool that we're created. So
maybe I'll give my perspective
and then ask him to
talk about it. More fit
is as I see it,
a tool for agile teams
to communicate well with our
customers. And of course this
can be more than agile
teams, but agile teams really
focused on communicating well with
their customers. Fitness is based
on fit and a lot
of people use, think of
fit and fitness as testing
tools, but I think of
them as customer communication tools,
yeah, the fit fits a
creation in a short period
of time to try to
make a reusable framework that
captured the essence of what
I had done. Maybe four
times over in the course
of different projects needing to
do this communication in the
past, I had done it
in, you know, frameworks that
address the specific needs of
the specific projects and weren't
reusable in any way. And
this was an attempt to
make something reusable and, and
both the Gemini and, and
quite a number of other
people have put, put a
lot of effort into fit
and then combining that with
Wiki to be a repository
of information and that's a
fitness. Okay. So to put
this in concrete terms, someone
is some software that someone
downloads and, and uses and
puts into their workflow. Yeah,
Yeah. It would be a,
it would be software it's.
The original was a, was
a, a Java framework and
probably what was it, 10
classes or something like that,
maybe 15 classes. So not
a very big framework, but
more importantly, it established a
style of testing and we
had the opportunity to, to
implement it in multiple languages.
So I asked Jim who
is, was into.net much more
than I was to help
me translate what I'd done
in java.net. And so Jim
did the.net version of the
framework. And, and the idea
is if somebody was converting
from Java to.net, they could
save all the tests that
they wrote because the tests
would be written as a
file that that fit would
read. The, the format I
chose was, was HTML and
wanting to put the facts
that were going to be
the, you know, the details
of the test in, in,
in tables. But that left
all the space around the
tables to describe why you
cared about those facts and
that made it a communication
tool. Okay. So the pros
around the tables is ignored
by the tool and the
tables themselves are the data
that drives the test. Let
me give you an example
because it's, it's hard to
describe, I think it's still
kind of in the abstract.
Yeah. People are familiar with
unit tests and people are
understand how to write programs
to test things, but So
let me just sort of
give an example. It's, it's
kind of magical what fit
does and when you first
see it, and a lot
of people who've done this,
they get very excited about
the possibilities. What you do
is you write a document
in word or in Wiki,
and it has a bunch
of tables in it that
say that software behaves this
way and you run it
through fit or fitness and
those tables turn green and
red saying, yes, it runs
this way or no, it
doesn't. And I'm under the
covers. It's actually quite simple.
But seeing this happen where
you've got a document that
has pros and it sort
of looks like a specification
or a requirements document, suddenly
telling you whether or not
it's right or not is
really cool. And it's a
and M I think really
interesting. So the way I
thought about it is, is
that we write a document
that says what we desire.
And then what we do
is we run, fit against
the system as built today.
And it annotates the document
by covering individual cells, red
or green. It says this
number is going to come
up 55. And if it
comes up 55, it'll be
green. And if it comes
at 57, it'll be red.
So what is the language
that's in the table? Is
it, are these verbs and
nouns that are known to
fit typically Tends to be
just facts. So if you
were doing a financial software
VZ, it would be dates
and dollar amounts and stuff
like that. And you know,
if, if maybe you're talking
about some kind of financial
instrument, you might have to
run 10 or 15 cases.
So you'll make a table
that has 10 or 15
rows, and I'll have as
many columns as you need
to describe that financial instrument.
If you have a different
financial instrument, you make a
different table with a different
number of columns. And how
does this interface with my
software? That's what fit does
fit would read the table,
read the HTML, and then
make calls into your software
to check those numbers, check
the numbers, and then writes
a new HTML document that
has the annotations has the
color. And of course you
change your software tomorrow. You
run it again, and you
get a different document with
different colors because your program
has improved, But you wouldn't
call this a unit testing
tool, or is this, it's
not really unit testing. It's
like Testing in the sense
that we're going to call
the actual objects that are
present in the program. But
we tend to write tests
at this level tests that,
that are about the concerns
of your customers. Instead of
being about the concerns of
your developers. Unit testing is
very much about what the
API is that the programmers
have to live. And in
fact, we really want these
tests or examples. I prefer
to call them examples. Okay.
We want these examples of
how the program is supposed
to behave to be sourced
from the customer. I mean,
ideally they're writing it because
this is a word document
or a Wiki document. We
want them to write it
at best in practice. Maybe
we're just saying, Hey, can
you give me some examples
on the whiteboard and they're
copying those yet. Okay. So
the difference between fit and
fitness, just to be clear
for the listener fit is
a command line tool that
Ord wrote in Java. And
then we translate it into
C sharp and other people
translated into other languages. Okay.
Fit ness is a Wiki
package that originally called the
fit command line tool. And
now integrates its own version
of fit into this Wiki
package. So the Wiki allows
you to write your documents,
do version control on them.
And then it also has
a little run button that
says, execute this document and
annotate it and tell me
what's going on in the
software. Okay. So if I
try to put this into
a larger context of all
the different families of all
the different kinds of tools
out there, we've got things
like, like end unit and
all the X unit style
tools. We've got things like
selenium, also a, a, a
fit like tool in that
you put instructions in, in
tables, but then it drives
a web browser. It's much
more unit test focused and
lives in the browser. But
sounds like what you're describing.
We've got the different X
spec, you know, our spec
and different kinds of specification
tools. If I want to
make sure that my application
is correct and complete, but
I have, this is a
cornucopia of tools to choose
from where does fit, where
does fit fit, and how
do I pick or do
I bother all? Well, that's
a really interesting question because
earlier ward and I were
talking about what, what happened
to fit. And I think
this is something that is
people have struggled with with
fit is where does it
fit? If you think about
the tools you're talking about,
they're in unit and our
spec, those are programmer testing
tools and specifically unit testing
tools. Something like selenium is
really an end to end
acceptance testing tool and fit
looks like either of those.
But I really see it
as a customer testing tool.
It's not either one, but
that's how I see people
using it in practice. But
I would rather see them
use it as a customer
testing tool. If there's something
that you're having trouble communicating
with your customer, like how
does a financial instrument behave
under certain circumstances? You know,
that's complicated and it's easy
to get wrong and you
might program it correctly and
you might have unit tests
and that your understanding as
a programmer could well be
wrong. And you want to
understand what it really does.
And that's what we want
you to talk to your
customer, get examples and code
those and then execute them.
That's my perspective. Yeah. I
think that's absolutely true. The,
the, the one thing is
whenever we're going to have
a conversation, if, if developers
are going to talk to
their customer, they have to
find some language to talk
to each other. That is
understood by both. And so
as developers, we try not
to use computer jargon, but
as a customer, the customer
needs to, to be focused
and narrow and, and concrete.
So we want to get
the customer to be specific.
So we say, well, don't
tell us you want the
interest rate formula, give us
some examples of the interest
rate formula that we can
check, because there's dozens of
ways to compute interest. And
that means that you might
actually have to do some
interest calculations so that we
can see how our understanding
of interest calculation is different
than yours. And that, that,
so now to bring this
back to the language, you
know, you're there sitting, okay,
I'm sitting at a spreadsheet.
I want to work up
a bunch of interest calculations.
I, as the customer can
decide how many columns there
are for a particular example,
you know, maybe I want
to include certain date calculation
methods, which can, can really
follow up the, you know,
if you're working in what
they call 33 60 time,
you know, which, you know,
assumes every month is 30
days. You know, that that's
a, a real mind bender
there in terms of a
certain kind of a computer
algorithms, because every month doesn't
have 30 days, you know?
So, so to do the
interest calculation, you can, you
know, you need to figure
out where, which month you're
talking about to be able
to do that. And, and
the customer can do that
as well as anybody. So
you're saying if there were
Edge cases that are really
difficult to express program or
not, those edge cases are
ultimately best understood by the
customer and they are the
ones that should be expressing
them in terms of examples.
Absolutely. And we want concrete
examples because what I've found
training people, how to use
this tool is when you
get these domain experts, these
business analysts or, or financial
experts or chemists, or whoever
it is that you have
in the room, and you
get them talking to each
other and they give them
talking to the programmers. I've,
I've seen two things happen
over and over one is
I can't believe the programmers
didn't understand this basic thing.
That's at the foundation of
what we've been doing for
the last two years. How
could they not know this?
When we're already two years
into development? And two, what
do you mean we're using
this to mean that I
thought it meant this. So,
you know, when you start
getting into concrete examples, people,
it flushes out ambiguity and
the domain experts actually start
disagreeing with each other too,
because a big part of
why you see requirements errors
in software is that we're
trying to take fuzzy domain
concepts, translate them into something
that's really unforgiving. And when
we don't, when we allow
that to be fuzzy programmers,
fill in the gaps with
their expectations and assumptions, that
may well be wrong and
often are Okay. But the,
the, the, the, the domain
people, the domain experts, the
customer in this case, maybe
thinking about things at a
certain level, one kind of
customer may be concerned about,
you know, he may, he
may express his business rules
in terms of buttons. And
he say, well, the user
will type here and then
click there. And I expect
this to happen. Well, maybe
a physicist is thinking in
much more abstract concepts and
fitness is ultimately gonna be
calling into code, going to
be calling into the domain.
How do you deal with
that? Pretty significant impedance mismatch?
Well, one assumption I had
is, is that they all
know how to work XL
and, and that if we
ask them to get concrete,
that they're, that, that Xcel
is a good way to
do it. Okay. And so,
so what we needed is
something that could take information
that was in that sort
of table and be able
to check it against the
program. And this is where,
you know, I, I, I'm
a fan of object oriented
programming. I love objects. And
I felt that the objects
boundary was the interface. So
I need something that could
take a quantity that was
in a row of a
table, and be able to
apply that to an object
and then get a result
back from that object and
compare that to some other
quantity and the next row
of the table, or the
next column, I guess it
would be. And, and, you
know, to me, that was
messaged sending. So, so I,
I wanted fit the library
to be part of the
application in the same way
that the user interface is
part of the application, but
I didn't want to talk
to the user interface. I
wanted to talk to the
same application that the user
interface talks to. So I
bypass the user interface, talk
straight to the application, and
that way, you know, a
unit tests do this too,
but here I'm using that
same interface for doing acceptance
tests. And that made sense
to me. Hi, this is
Scott coming at you from
another in time. Are you
looking for an object relational
mapping tool for mission critical
projects using lincoln.net? I wanted
to share with you genome,
so specifically designed for developing.net
enterprise applications. Genome is a
mature link, integrated ORM tool.
It's been employed in numerous
large scale projects over the
last six years, genome was
created for the.net platform as
opposed to being a port
from Java. And it's thrived
on platform innovation since.net. 1.0
genome has supported links since
its CTP release in may
of 2006. It offers several
unique features, such as encapsulation
and reuse of link queries
and expressions. You can really
fully harness the power of
link while benefiting from your
database platforms. Unique features, compose
complex link queries, decompose the
query logic and your domain
model link supports all the
major database platforms you find
in enterprise environments like SQL
server, but also Oracle and
IBM DB two, and find
out more about how genome
integrates tightly with visual studio
and what tools genome offers
to reduce development time@tinyurl.com slash
try genome G N O
M E, where you can
also download a free and
fully functional trial version. I
hope you enjoy it. I
wonder if someone is trying
to make fit work for
them, Replication, if they might
find themselves writing specific Code
to interface with fit to
make their application fit friendly.
Well, yeah, in fact, if
you start out with fit,
then you tend to build
an application that has a
lot of, you know, you
might call them access points
for fit, or I like
to think of is, you
know, internal modularity. And, and
if you do it that
way, then you'll find that
the fit is a natural.
Now there's a lot of
kind of awful programs that
are, you know, just a
hodgepodge and there's no single
way to talk to anything.
And the closest we can
find, do a standard interfaces
that they all, you know,
work through a web browser.
And that makes a tremendous
pressure to make universal tools
that basically operate the browser
under remote control. And what
that does is that separates
you from the objects in
question, for example, you can't
ask it anything that isn't
in the output, you know,
whereas, you know, I, when
I'm talking to the objects
directly, I can ask the
object, the question that isn't
going to be in the
output. Right. You know, and,
and I can get an
answer from it too, because
I'll just, I'll just let
that object do that for
the sake of testing. And,
and you know, that, that,
that, that is the power
of objects. So, you know,
objects that are kind of,
you know, had their day
and people are on to
other things. And, and, you
know, that's a, that's a
technique that was important to
me. And I think that,
you know, it's, it's, it's
something that was a little
bit of my religion that
the, you know, hasn't really
stuck or has, has fit.
Has it stay Jane? Well,
I, so was for a
time I asked, I said
to ward, I've been working
on the C sharp version
and why, why don't I
take over maintenance of the
Java version two and try
to coordinate all this stuff.
And that, that, that was
several years ago. And I
have to say, I I've,
it hasn't, nothing's been happening
with it for a couple
of years, to be quite
honest, it's, it's, it may
have had its day. What
I found is that fit
really wants you to think
about your code in terms
of a domain object layer.
So you take the knowledge
that your customers have, and
you want to encode it
into main objects, which is
a wonderful way of programming
that has just never really
caught on, except among some
of the intelligence yet, Because
there are people that I
know in the domain, you
know, the DDD and some
BDD kind of communities that
are, that are rabidly enthusiastic
about jewels like fit. Yeah.
Yeah. Well, domain driven design
is perfect for, and it's,
it's a great way of
programming. Where does I just
had to grab the mic
and it was, it was
Eric, You know, Eric, Eric Evans.
So, you know, who, you
know, wrote the book on
demander and he says, look,
this, you know, you're describing
here one more time, this
way you test things, you've
got to get that out
there. And I said, okay,
I'll get that out there
by writing a general purpose
library, you know? So, so
yes, I'm, I'm absolutely aligned
with that. And I think
that's the right thing to
do. And of course it's
a natural fit for people
who have, who have already
drunk that Koolaid, But why
isn't a, why isn't catching
on, I mean, companies like
Microsoft and others are building
in all sorts of, of
test, test runners and test
drivers, and everyone wants code
coverage, and everyone wants a
red, green refactor, but not
so much with the, with
the DDD and the fit
and fitness. And it seems
that in the teams I
work with, it just seems
that domain driven design is
a foreign way of thinking
and fit. Just like test
driven development will drive the
design of your code to
more decoupled objects. And to
entry points in the system
fit will drive the design
of your domain layer. And
if you don't have a
domain layer, it's going to
be challenging to use. And
my hope would be that
people who don't have a
domain layer using fit would
learn to create a domain
layer and do that. But
in fact, what has happened
is that they're turning it
into a fairly bad acceptance
testing tool through the web.
And yes, you can do
that with fit. And it
sort of looks like selenium.
And I think selenium actually
was inspired by fit. I
remember hearing from those folks
back when fit was first
becoming publicized, but in order
to do acceptance testing through
the web, you have to
really have sort of a
procedural programming language where you
say, go to this page,
press this button, put this
thing in, go in a
loop. Here's we're going to
log in again. So we
need a set routine. It
turns out that doing that
in HTML tables kind of
sucks. Yeah. Well, and like
where it said not everything
is Exposed via the internet
and it gets very complicated
and it's so it's so
complicated. In fact, you need
variables, you need loops, you
need set routines. It's so
complicated that your customers won't
understand it. So they're not
writing it anymore. Which brings
back, brings you back to
the, kind of the relative
simplicity of Excel. I mean,
if everything can be expressed
in a table of examples,
why isn't that exciting? And
you're saying it's ultimate because
our software designs typically don't
support that. And if, and
if our customers can't understand
the fit tests and fit
is a tool for improving
customer collaboration and really getting
communication and understanding between customers
and programmers, if they can't
understand what we're doing there,
because we're not using domain
driven design, we're going through
the web and it's too
complicated. Why are we using
fit? Why don't we just
use a procedural programming language
and use J unit or
selenium or water or something
else we'll see now, now
I'm hearing a word I'm
hearing fit is dead Long
lived fit. You know, I
would, you know, I would
say that there, there's a
couple of things that I
did that maybe set the
bar too high for fit.
One is I wanted it
to be uniform across a
wide variety of implementations. Cause
I saw it as a
way for people to have
mobility, you know, so that
they wouldn't get trapped in
their own implementation, that they
would be able to say,
well, we're going to go
from Java to.net or from.net
to, you know, Ruby or
whatever. And we're going to
take all our tests along
with us because our tests
are just HTML documents that
have a bunch of facts
expressed as strings and numbers.
Now, to my surprise, producing
a document that has tables
with a bunch of facts
and strings and numbers turns
out to be hard even
here in 2008, 2009. Wait,
Oh, Hey good. Yeah. Well,
that's one of my problems.
Right. But, but, but, but
you know, if I think
about it, if I needed
to make a document right
now that had nice looking
tables in it, I don't
have a tool on my
computer. That'll do it. You
know, that tables turn out
to be in a Wiziwig
kind of context, turn out
to be a little too
hard to do. Right. And,
and I just assumed that
that was a soft problem.
I assumed that people call
people could write documents that
had tables in them and
it could maintain them businesspeople.
Yeah. Gosh, actual suits. Yeah.
You know? Yeah. You turned
that over to your web
design geeks. Right. So, Oh
yeah. It makes them tables,
you know, it's too hard
for me. And, and if
you can't, if you can't
write the language freely then
saying that we're going to
have a communication tool that's
based on this language is,
is just dreaming. And so,
yeah, very frustrating to me.
But I will say that
the ideas, you know, I
think there was an argument
going on early, you know,
that fit kind of stepped
into, and it was like,
is, is, is, is DDD
important. Or, you know, what
is the role of automation
versus, you know, say exploratory
testing and so forth. And
there wasn't anything to point
to that says, this is
a good example of what
can be done. And so
I think there's been enough
successes with fit. You know,
people who say, Oh man,
it has transformed the way
we write software. Even if
it's only one out of
every five people who try
it, have that kind of
success because of successes happened.
It caused people to have
another go at writing these
frameworks. And I think, you
know, the, our aspect is
interesting. And I think cucumber
is one that really is,
is I guess, a wrapper
around our spec. I'm not
sure what it even is,
but it's something where, where
you write text files instead
of HTML documents, but you
get to choose your language
very carefully to be understandable.
And writing text files is
within, you know, the general
ability of the tools that
come with every computer. And
so that, it's probably more
the way to go. It's,
it's, it's a little more
syntactic. And I think in,
in terms of running cucumber
programs, it's, it's, you know,
if you want to run
them through the browser, cause
what you really care about
is, you know, browser anomalies,
you can do that too.
So there's a lot of,
a lot of versatility in
the backend and those wouldn't
exist if it weren't for
fit kind of saying here's
a space and here's something
to do. So now I'm
now I'm torn. I want
to ask you the award
before as the creator of
fit is fit dead. I
don't think so. Okay. And
I think it's what is
fit is going to be
a small piece of a
software transition technology. You know,
the people who bother do
build those tables and recognize
them as assets that are
worth keeping our, you know,
we have to protect their
investment. They thought they were
going to get an investment
and fit we'll be around
for them. It's just that
it isn't a flashy in
any sense. It's like, is
there a community that is
investing in fit right now?
I'm in this room, I
guess. Well, you know, I'm
not investing. Jim is fit
dead. The dream lives on
fit. I, I, I, yes,
I'm equivocating. I at one
point identified myself as the
project coordinator for fit. I'm
no longer doing that. Nobody
else has stepped up. There's
no, t-shirts, there's no t-shirts
however fit nests, which was
an early fork of fit
that does the Wiki is
continued to maintain. It's maintained
by Bob Martin, uncle Bob
at object mentor. And it
is slightly different than fit.
I would like to see
more focused on the communication
customer communication side of things,
but it is still the
same underlying ideas and people
who want fit. We'll find
a nice polished package over
in fitness. So if you're
listening to this and you
think, wow, that sounds really
cool. Go, go check out
fitness. If you've been using
fit and you want to
keep using it, if it's
still there, I mean, it
hasn't gone away, but I
don't know of anybody. Who's
still maintaining the Java and
C sharp versions that ward
and I worked on. So,
you know, I w I
learned a lesson from this
and, and, and you'd think
I would have known it
already. I hooked up a
fit to a Wiki for
the purpose of writing a
documentation about fit, but I
was convinced that people needed,
you know, dozens or hundreds
of columns. And that Xcel
was the thing that was
going to manage those columns.
And so I wanted to
be able to take XL
tables and put them into
documents. And I knew that
the table syntax that people
were doing in wikis wouldn't
stand up to it. Well,
it turns out I was
wrong. It turns out that
the, the ability to collaborate
among developers and customers, and
especially among between different customers,
that the Wiki technology was
attractive enough, that it was
kind of the new ground
that needed to be plowed,
that there is a test
repository and, and it shared
between development and the customer.
And, and that is as
simple as Wiki, even if
it is kind of a
pain in the neck to
deal with tables in Wiki.
It's, it's, it's no, it's
no worse than the, the
pitiful tools you have in
your laptop. So, so collaboration
was more important than the
expressiveness of the languages that
I wanted people to invent
to talk about their problem.
And I think, I mean,
I regret, and maybe this
is because as a consultant,
people, people call me to
help them solve a problem.
So I've seen a lot
of cases where people are
using fit to do these
sort of procedural through the
web interface test. And I
regret that because I think
the real power here is
the domain driven design and
the customer collaboration. And even
if it is dead and
that's, we're not seeing a
lot of that, that's still
necessary. If we're going to
create correct software, we still
have to understand what our
customers need and mean we
still have to do that.
So that's, I think that
is fertile ground. And we
need to keep exploring that.
I think there are people
who are exploring that we
need to keep it, keep
it going. There's also a
lesson here, too. It is
in, in that, is that
we've come to the point
where we judge software by
the community that, that supports
it, you know, and, you
know, I made a kind
of a three month long
effort to, to build a
community of developers. And my
focus was on breath, you
know, of languages and not,
you know, you know, not
changing it or evolving it.
I said, let's hold it
still. So that all the
different developers can get caught
up. And that, that wasn't
a good community building strategy.
And people are, you know,
people look at fit and
they say, well, you know,
where's, the community community seems
to be fitness. And, you
know, so, you know, there
were, there was a fork
and that fork turned out
to have a writer's strategy
than mine. And, but does
that mean it's dead? You
know, I mean, is it
just, you know, it just
spawned, it's a progeny and
that's a, that's where the
action is. All right. Well,
thanks so much, James shore
and ward Cunningham, which it
been talking to me about
fit and fitness today. Thank
you. It's pleasure to be
here. All right. And this
has been another episode of
Hansel minutes. I'll see you
again next week.